Oh, the last person in's gonna miss here.
Cheers. These chairs. Yeah. Chair.
There, there. Chair here. Someone wants there.
Well, I always had the primary Industries committee
with standing room only. That's
Right.
That's right. He's a chair there. Could you move?
Still coming. Should have thrown so there on the floor.
That'll be fine.
I think it's,
is he very good?
Is he here later in the week?
Uh, I think so.
Well, welcome to the primary production select committee.
Um, we are talking around forestry.
Um, so Minister, I'll leave it in your hands.
We've got you for 45 minutes. Yeah. Just clarification, Mr.
Chair. Forestry
Only. No, no. We go here for
Everything. Put everything.
Sorry. AG and Forestry. Yeah. Sorry.
Um, so fire away minister.
Thank you so much. Well, colleagues, uh, good afternoon,
and thanks for having me back.
I, I have a few opening remarks,
but I think, uh, what was most useful for both sides
and maybe as the public watching is the conversation we
have and, and so on.
So, happy to get into that. First, can I start
by thanking our, uh, the men
and women of the primary sector of New Zealand, our farmers
and our foresters and the fishing, uh, people
and others for their hard work
and their significant contribution
to not only the New Zealand economy,
but to feeding millions of people all around the world?
I have the, you know, the privilege of spending a bit
of time overseas, both as trade
and agriculture minister together.
And I've gotta say that actually as the Minister
of Agriculture, uh, overseas, my job is very easy.
Uh, New Zealand farmers
and across the primary sector are, uh, held in high regard.
Uh, uh, they, uh, innovate. They work extremely effectively.
They produce the highest quality, safest food
and fiber you could find almost anywhere in the world.
And there are many countries who want
to emulate them and follow them.
As a minister of trade, my job is very difficult
because the world is a place where there is still a lot
of protectionism
and many countries, governments are asked
to protect against the, you know,
productive nature of New Zealand farmers.
But that's actually a good problem to have.
Uh, and, um, you know, I just want to recognize that
as the economy start to recover as a men
and woman of provincial New Zealand, who
as always are helping dig us out of
what was the challenge for all New Zealand.
And so every New Zealand is better off
because of the New Zealand primary, uh, sector.
Um, they are continuing to improve.
You'll see in so of which we have an extra round
of announcements soon, the forecast of performance
of the primary sector coming up.
Uh, we've hit a fixed $60 billion worth of, uh,
production exports, uh, for the first time.
And I would expect that we'll continue
to see that, uh, grow.
That is a story both of quality, uh, uh,
but it's, you know, it is the amount that we produce,
but is the value that New Zealanders get from that
as they sell overseas?
You would've seen the government across the board has, um,
you know, set the ambitious target of doubling the value
of exports over 10 years.
I want to recognize that, uh, the opposition,
the Labor Party has joined us in that, uh, last year
and saying if Admiral would also work towards that.
I think that's important because, uh, you know,
it's not just about how much you produce.
We have the ability to sustainably produce more whilst
meeting our international and domestic, uh, climate
and environment obligations.
But it's about the value that we receive for that,
which comes directly to, um, to innovation.
Uh, and, um, you know, 60 bi, $60.4 billion,
30% increase over the previous year
of exports from the primary sector.
Not only puts money in the pockets
of every New Zealanders directly and indirectly,
but it continues to create the, uh, create jobs.
But secondly, um, um, uh, Mr.
Chair, since last I was
before you, uh, we have worked, uh, hard
with stakeholders across the board
and parties in Parliament to get the balance between, um,
uh, the regulations that are needed and must be there, uh,
and not, uh, just adding cost
to productive businesses in New Zealand.
I don't want to recognize significant leadership's been
shown by, uh, farming organizations in working
with the government, in effect many parties across our
parliament to help us understand and get the balance right.
You know, if you take our announcement, uh, uh, not
so long ago around, um, farmer emissions,
it's clear farmers have an obligation to help us meet.
Uh, our net zero target of obligation are by 2050,
but we shouldn't be doing things
that merely close down farms
and make New Zealanders produce less.
And the reason for that is less carbon efficient food
producers around the world will produce that food.
It's called leakage. Our economy will worse off,
the food will still be produced, and climate is worse off.
So we have taken a very focused, uh, scientific, uh,
uh, approach to this.
And I want to, uh, thank the leaders in the farming
community for actually joining us
and working away at us all being reasonable.
They have come out and said it is a challenge to do
what the government has asked, but it's based on science
and we will work to do Albert.
And I think that's all we could ask on it.
The most important point here is across the board.
People are now saying that we must meet our obligation
and we should work towards that.
Final bit before I stop, um, is that we, well,
we continue to invest in innovation.
Started when we're in government last time,
continued on the previous government.
We keep doing that. The way that we meet our obligations is
through science and innovation.
It is through backing New Zealanders across the board
to find solutions to problems.
You know, it's a very clear
strategy, strategy the government has.
We want to produce this more
with using the same amount or less.
That's what production being productive is.
Uh, and, uh, you know, we must continue to do that.
But the government has a role, uh, through, uh, partnering,
investing with not doing for, and forestry.
Uh, we have seen for the first time forestry sector export a
billion dollars worth of processed, uh, uh,
forestry products.
That is a significant achievement.
And I think we need to continue to find, find ways
to incentivize 'em, which isn't cash in itself,
but incentivize 'em to innovate
and find products that we can sell overseas.
You know, the government doesn't own, um, trees
or forests, so it is for the forest owners to decide
what they want to do with that wood.
Many choose to send logs overseas, in part
because of the type of, know, the, the,
the way the trees have been, uh, have been treated
as they have been planted and they've grown.
But if we can find more ways through innovation to add value
and create jobs in New Zealand, open up markets
around the world, so those products can be sold, uh,
you know, with the value added that's good
for the economy across the board.
But it's particularly good for our regions.
My approach, uh, over the last year
and forestry has been the same in other
parts of the primary sector.
We want better rules and smarter rules.
Not what, just ones that hold back.
Uh, and that, uh, create costs without a clear, uh,
benefit of outcome.
The forestry sector has worked with us very, very closely,
and I'm extremely grateful, uh, to them.
They have provided advice, uh,
and examples of their experience
that helps us get the rules right.
We have to get the rules right.
Governments has obligations area,
but they already have stepped up to work with us.
You'll have know, uh, when, uh, we came to government,
we inherited a court case.
The government was being sued over the, uh, the emissions,
uh, uh, trading scheme, forestry register.
We were able to work through that and get the cost down
and get in a much better space by setting up a
industry group to work with us that
for case was not settled, it was dropped.
And, and they, they decided not to go ahead, uh, with it.
And that's gotta be good for us.
'cause all of our energy on both sides now has been put into
better rules and regulations and how we can work together.
Forestry has a very important role to play in New Zealand.
It not only helps us meet our, our short to medium term, uh,
climate obligation,
but it creates a lot of jobs in regions of New Zealand.
In some cases, there are fewer other jobs,
but we need to be as productive and innovative
and forestry as we are in every other
part of the primary sector.
I recently, uh, was involved in a trade mission
to India from the forestry sector, both processed, uh, um,
uh, timber and forestry products,
as well as those that grow trees.
And the opportunity that that group saw there to work
with the government to add value to
what we do in New Zealand and open up opportunities in new
markets was almost unprecedented.
It shows me that we shouldn't treat forestry any different
than any other part of the primary sector.
Had the opportunity to produce income for New Zealanders
and create jobs in New Zealand.
And if we can help them, uh, with better, smarter rules
to achieve what they need to,
and at the same time, uh, um, we, um, you know,
open up new markets, then the delivery from the wider
primary sector will continue
to be something New Zealand should be proud of.
And with that in mind, uh, happy to take,
uh, comments and questions.
Thanks minister. We're going straight
to Steve Abel for first's.
Question. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, minister, good to have you here.
This is sort of a crossover issue question, uh,
that relates both to agriculture and trade.
Um, live of animal exports is something
that your government has, uh,
touted It would be doing work on and,
and having reports complete on, uh, this past year.
Um, it both impacts agricultural production here
and also trade.
What's going on with that? And have you kicked it to touch?
No. So, uh, minister Hogan's responsible, it's one
of the delegations, and you have a next, I let him out to
that more substantially, but there's still a
commitment on the part of the government.
We campaigned on it. We, we did say we want to get it right.
Uh, there are opportunities for parts of the agricultural,
you know, production to be able to meet demand overseas.
Uh, and there is interest in, you know, live animals.
But we were very clear the only way animals would be able
to leave under regulatory regime we set up in New Zealand is
it met the very high standards that, uh,
we have set in New Zealand.
And New Zealanders would expect
to run under animal husbandry
and animal welfare, the way animals would be treated on any
shift that left the purpose-built ships,
and also in the country they go to.
So, Mr. Hogar has been working at that, uh,
and he'll be in a better best place to tell you, uh,
you know, what the next steps are,
but it's not something that stepped back from,
we were very clear though, we said
that we would get that balance right.
And, uh, no animals should leave New Zealand
until we have arrived at that point of
that very high level of assurance.
And the work that he's been doing with the sector
and with officials is commendable.
But you'll be able to, uh, talk to in greater
Detail, supple.
Yep. Yep. So you said you'd been on a trade mission
recently, so I understand as, as recently as, uh,
August you visited Indonesia,
and I presume that would've been
with your foreign affairs trade add on,
but perhaps also with your minister. It
Was, it was both. And it wasn't
raised in a single meeting I was at.
Yeah. So, uh, there's an, sorry. The live
Animal exports wasn't raised in a single meeting I was at,
uh, when I was in Indonesian.
Okay. So that's interesting
because in October, Indonesian media recorded,
ordered the, um, cooperation between the two countries,
includes plans for the import
of superior livestock such as dairy cows.
And Hamish Ma, a representative for the New Zealand Ministry
of Foreign Affairs and Trade,
expressed his country's support
and readiness to supply live cattle to Indonesia. Is that
Incorrect? That, so that gentleman
doesn't work for Infa,
but he, uh, is the, um, site, which is the, um, special
Special Agricultural trading.
Yeah. And he has opportunity to go
and look, talk to different markets.
Well, look, I I'm not gonna comment on
what the media said there anymore than I probably would
comment on the media in New Zealand,
but it wasn't raised in meetings I was at.
There were conversations about how we can help, um, uh,
Indonesia with food production.
And one of the things that's very interesting,
if you look at some of the vegetables they may produce, uh,
from, you know, fruit and other things to, uh, animals and,
and meat or dairy, there are many things New Zealand does
around the world around innovation.
So New Zealand farmers, you know, produce some
of the highest quality produce around the world
because of systems we have in place,
and animal feed and so on.
Uh, Indonesia does import, um,
live animals from Australia.
They don't from New Zealand.
Uh, should, uh, uh, you know, minister hoard, uh, um,
you know, uh, uh, think that a request
for legislation was in place, a request from Indonesia,
they, as every other country would from the world,
would have to meet the very, very high standards.
But one of the ways, uh, today we could help Indonesia,
not only with their beef production,
dairy production, is genetics.
And that doesn't have to mean live animal.
My final one just share would be, um, does exporting
that superior livestock, uh, in the form of genetics
as live animals, um, such as dairy cows in the instance
of the Indonesian report, what threat does that pose
to our point of difference?
And is that the best use of our genetic?
So before we go on, I'm not gonna accept the premise
of the question that says, suppose live animals are leaving.
It's illegal in New Zealand.
I've been pretty clear there are many ways we can help
Indonesia and improve their production to feed people more.
We can sell them more food,
and we can help them with genetics, which doesn't have
to mean, doesn't mean live animals.
If you look at how we have improved, um, uh,
livestock in New Zealand, some of it has been
through selective genetic breeding within New Zealand.
Some of it has been the importation, uh, often of, uh,
not animals, but of seamen and embryos and other things.
So there are many ways to do this.
Your question, though, see,
is should we put ourselves up in Fortress New Zealand
and pretend that we can just sell to the world?
Or do we have to continue to make the case
that we help others for better access to markets
and they should be able to feed themselves?
New Zealand produces enough food
to feed 40 million people around the world.
I, I think it's better to say 400 million people get 10%
of their diet from New Zealand.
It doesn't matter how much we produce.
We couldn't feed the whole world.
So we had to continue to look at the value of what we do
and how we can go up in the value chain.
Our exporters through the
producers are very, very good at that.
But there are many ways we create jobs in New Zealand,
helping others be more productive.
It's not something we should be afraid of. Mr.
You gotta, you've gotta sub there. Mark. Uh, yes.
It's actually back on, on, on minister's question, uh,
and statement, if that's all right?
Yep. Sure. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And, and minister, good to see you on online.
Apologies for my absence. I'm, uh, in isolation as it were.
Um, we talk about doubling of revenue, export earnings,
and to your point, when we, we congratulate New Zealanders
as being innovative, and we certainly are, do you see
that being the area which would be the largest to, to,
to fill in that hole as it were, you know, doubling revenue,
export earnings is a, is a hell of a task?
Or is it a case that we just produce more?
Or, uh, third, third sort of question statement?
Is it a combination of both?
Yeah. So, so there are two ways to earn more.
One is to work twice as hard. The other was to work smarter.
So our, our proposal before the election, or a commitment,
and it has come through governance, has
doubled the value of exports.
Uh, it was doubled the value of exports, right?
The amount, not the amount we export,
but, uh, the value that we get for it now.
I think it's a bit of a combination of both.
There are, there are opportunities for us to, um,
add value to the production.
We have, you know, Fonterra is
a pretty good example of that.
When you go to the China market, uh, they have taken a, a,
um, a, uh, a cream product that is for, um, use
and, um, food production, uh,
and has a greater value, uh, uh,
and produces more cream, uh, when it is used for whipping
or other things, uh, um, you know, cakes
and sandwiches, whatever, as they put it in, uh,
for the amount of dairy product that goes in it.
That's innovation. And that actually has been exceptionally,
uh, beneficial to the Chinese market to Fonterra,
which flows straight back to, um,
you know, producers in New Zealand.
So I think the answer is, it can be both.
Is this a play that says it's just double the amount
of dairy or meat that we produce?
It certainly isn't. And you know, there are many examples.
Now, if we take meat where we don't compete on price
and markets as we used to, it is on providence.
It's an innovation. It's the quality
and reputation of that meat.
It is on many, many things.
And I think it's a combination of those two I made.
It's very clear though, that there are environmental
obligations that we have in New Zealand.
The government sets, uh, doesn't allow us to double
how much we sell by doubling the amount that we produce.
So innovation, uh, finding ways to do more
with the same amount or less is the biggest part of the,
you know, the, the story of us being able
to sell more value overseas.
And that's part of the reason why the government previous
and current, uh, works to invest in partnership
to drive greater innovation.
Not only the farm. Great.
But through food processing and export
Minister, very quickly, are you confident invariably
governments do change
and you've, you've worked across the aisle to make sure
that the kind of language that a future government
that potentially is not one that we share, uh, is
of the same volition you,
you're confident in that, correct? Well,
Well look, um, I mean, I think in trade
and agriculture, we should find ways
to work across the aisle.
There will be differences in which is political
because it's parliament, political people,
but you know, New Zealand farmers need all of our backing.
Doesn't mean they're allowed to do what they want.
No government ever allowed that.
But we need to, uh, make sure that there is a greater amount
of, certain, greater amount of certainty, both
around primary, uh, the primary sector
and also in our export markets.
But in case that doesn't work out, I'm working very hard.
So we get another three years.
Brilliant. Right. Uh, Joe, thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, um, for coming
to the select committee minister.
I just wanted to, I've got lots of questions,
but I'll, I'll just, um, ask them
as the chair allows it. Um,
It's very tough.
Um, on, in the, um, NPI annual report, um,
assessment of operations overview for 24 25, it talks about,
um, only 82%
of the agricultural programs supporting
sustainability were achieved.
And I'm just wondering if you're able to, um, if not,
you can come back to us maybe later on,
but what programs weren't delivered
and what were the barriers to those?
Yeah, yeah. Being delivered completely. So,
So in some cases not fully achieved working on work
under progress and so on.
I mean, sustainability is very, very important.
Uh, um, but it's not the only thing we need to do.
We, we sometimes, we generally end up focusing on
sustainably more than what we're trying to do, which is be
as productive as we can be.
But that doesn't mean we should be producing, uh, you know,
um, in a way that is not sustainable.
Um, but I'll, I'll pass to, to Ray perhaps to go into
that a little bit more about some of the detail.
But I know you have 'em here later in the week, so
to really get into that he can help.
Yeah. Which might be a better, might be a better idea.
I mean, there's, you'll know, there's, um, I think there's,
NPI i's got about 120 different outputs on these things.
So I, I can't tell you exactly off Yeah, those,
which bits of those we missed.
Um, generally speaking, um, for each
of those appropriation lines, there's an attempt
to get some measurements on them.
Um, some, some
of 'em are a bit harder to achieve than others.
Some of 'em are about whether you kind
of get enough programs across the line, others are more,
are much more substantive in terms of the volumes
that we might be processing in
particular areas of the business.
Um, so ha happy to go through those in a bit
of detail if, if, if you wanted.
But I, I suspect, um,
I suspect in those goals, they'll be largely about, um,
investments and programs that we are making.
Okay. So Joe, no. Can I ask new one since then, Cathy?
Okay. Okay, cool. Thank you.
Um, now I know this po this isn't specifically necessarily
just your delegation I'm about to ask you about,
but as agriculture minister, I do think you have a,
a responsibility probably over this,
and it's around the issue with our wilding pines, uh,
taking over really, um, productive
or potential to continue to take over productive farmland
and the conversations around, uh, returning grazing
to some dock land as well.
I'm interested to know Yeah.
Where you are thinking it is, is at with that,
because I think given that we've had a, a reduction in the,
um, the funding for attacking wilding Pines,
How have we had a reduction These
Things? We put some more, we
put more money into the
budget, an extra $2 million.
Well, my understanding is that it's been when I get no,
when I get up and talk to people on the ground, they say
that there is not as much funding. So,
So, so before we go on, I can help you
because otherwise we end up,
But let me finish my question first.
I'm just interested to, makes extra
2 million what you're doing in that space. That's
An increase, not a decrease, But those farmers
that are being affected are saying that there's less
so, so as
Politicians, Whoever's right, it doesn't matter.
But I'm just wanted to know, I know it's not specifically,
you've got other ministers that have those delegations,
but I'm really interested to hear your views on, on
That. So, so it's not a delegation,
it's administered by securities.
It's not a allegation. He's specifically responsible
that a delegation would be if I was,
and I gave him something like, uh, animal welfare.
So it's, he's responsible
and you'll have them beforehand shortly,
but I just want to correct that.
You may be having people saying there is a cut,
there is not, there's extra money putting extra $2 million
into, uh, wild pines, uh,
budget this year, which, which helps.
So, so, but I am taking an interest for two reasons. Yeah.
More broadly, um, uh, in the case of agriculture,
but I'm forestry minister, so anything that happened.
So interestingly, if you think about wilding Pine,
there's been a lot in the media around this.
If you look at, um, uh, some of the most recent media around
that, that was a purposeful government decision many,
many years ago to, you know, 20 years ago Yep.
To go from airplanes
and drop trees everywhere in an area to stop erosions,
to grow forests.
Yep. So that's not wilding pines as a result of that.
There can be wilding pines,
but it's not that vast parts of the countryside.
In the case of what you saw on TV as a result
of wilding pines, it was a conscious decision
that property wasn't the best one of those years ago.
Uh, uh, second, secondly, um, there are two opportunities
that we need to see that the cost.
And so what I've said to the agency, so I wouldn't argue
that the extra money we put in
is enough to meet the problem.
I'm not saying it is. I'm just saying
that we saw the issue coming
and gave more so that actually we could start to look
to do more and gear up.
I have asked 'em to go and look at
what the money is being spent on
before the case is made for more,
because I want to make sure it's being used effectively.
It's not just on the management of idea and strategies.
Effectively dealing with this, uh, minister Hoggard,
when he comes before you may well talk about go working
with feds, federated farmers
and other foreign farming groups, as well
as environmental groups about priorities to target
and the best way to do it.
But also looking at doing different types of trials to, to,
to get rid of areas where wilding pines are starting
to, to take over.
Uh, and some of those may well be successful, others not.
The final bit of your question is around, um,
you know, grazing and so on.
I'll be very careful there because the Ministry
of Conservation has responsibility, what can do, it's guided
by an act and so on.
But there are likely to be some very small scale controlled
trials to see the effect that grazing may have upon, um,
um, upon, you know, that part of the countryside
and wilding pines and so on.
Don't wanna jump ahead and say what that looks like. Yeah.
There are a lot of farmers who tell me it's great, just
as there are farmers telling you they're better cut.
So let's take that with a grain of salt and sea.
But the point of this is
before we say this is the amount that might be needed,
what do we take it away from
to reprioritize rather than borrowing money or taxing more?
Uh, we need to make sure the money
that's there's being spent will get the most that it can.
You will see us having put in place, uh, very, uh,
strict rules around full farm to forest conversion.
Mm-hmm. Right? And it was supported across parliament.
I'm very grateful for that
because, uh, again, it's given, it's given, it's given a lot
of certainty that in itself, uh, uh, you know, uh,
could well have a positive impact, right?
Uh, fewer trees being planted,
but ultimately there were parts of the countryside
where a lot of work's got, needs to be done very,
very quickly because, you know, you get to the point
where it could be outta control.
There's other areas where it's more
managed over a period of time.
So the thinking very quickly is going into that
by the other two ministers, Steve? Yes. Up.
Yeah. It's a sub. I mean, you would acknowledge
that Wilding Pines is a wicked problem.
It's had a, has a ravenous ability to consume land,
which is both bad for production and for biodiversity
and for clarity, the, the cut down to $10 million
that your government made in 2024 was a cut from
the Jobs for Nature funding.
You've increased it to $12 million.
But, um, the wilding pine networks is, it needs
to be 25 million per year over the next decade.
So the current funding is less than half of what's needed.
Um, Southland, uh, regional council environment,
Southland said that without adequate funding, wild
and pine control work will go backwards
with cleared land prime for reinfestation
and also further expansion across the region.
So are are you really taking
this problem seriously? Most, yeah.
Taking serious, but a couple of things.
A couple of things. First, jobs and nature wasn't jobs
and nature wasn't baseline funding, it was limited.
If you wanted it to be there forever,
your government could have put it in there.
It wasn't. So that's the way that not
My government, Well, you were in
government as a green mp.
Uh, I wasn't. No, well,
Your party was, and you're a green MP now,
unless there's some other stuff you'd like
to divorce yourself from they did as well.
Right. So the point of this is, the point of this is, right,
But your government chose before
It wasn't baseline funding, if you want be there,
you set up it is baseline funding.
The $2 million is baseline funding.
It's not there for four years and disappear.
So I can come back sometime in
the future and say it was a cut.
It wasn't a cut, it was a decision on the part
of the last government to have a time bound funding. So
Let me clarify my question. $25 million
needed annually for
10 years. So, so you,
so they have come out
and said $25 million that probably needs some head checking,
but before we can look at any more money,
I wanna make sure it's gonna achieve something other than
20, spending $25 million.
There are many ways to be able to,
to get wilding pines away.
You know, largely there is a view out there
that is radiator pine.
That's a problem that generally it is not. Right.
And so it is not from productive
production forests in New Zealand.
It's through many other things. Right.
And that's where we're gonna be very careful
because there is a big argument that's
that's grown in the public, that is foresters
who are responsible for this foresters have
to be responsible for what they do,
including on other people's land.
In this case, the challenges, you know, wider.
This here is an example of something
that could help in the future.
And I almost am hesitant to do this.
Uh, you know, there's technology around the world
with CRISPR that allows you to turn something off,
which is not, uh, uh, you know, an introduction
of something else genetic.
That means these trees in the future have to be planted,
you know, have to be propagated rather than, you know,
the spread of, of seeds and so on and, and pollen.
There are many technologies we don't have available
to us today that we should have the ability to consider
to see whether it may help with wilding pines or other pest.
So, so, you know, that's part of the, the biotech bill
that comes through that gives us that cut
that to consider it.
But what I would say is that as far the amount
of money is concerned, uh, there is a debate
and discussion going on with a wide group
of stakeholders about how
we might meet the cost both in labor
and the actual cost of dealing
with a growing wilding pine problem.
I agree with you. I don't think we should assume
for any one moment, it is purely the taxpayer
that should meet that cost when we can see the best way
to deal with in different circumstances
and that we are getting the most trees out
for the money that is committed.
Uh, I would happily make the case for some more,
but until I am clear of that, just me committing
what someone else says we should spend may not be
the best use of money today.
Yeah. Look, we'll move on from, um, this subject
'cause it really is plenty of others.
And I like to remind you that I got there,
there is a bill in, in the, in the members ballot that deals
with this whose got
A wild piece. Yeah.
A wild Next.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister.
Um, it's positive to hear about your, um, trade
and export, um, discussions.
However, some forest, particularly north of Toko Maori Bay,
are still finding the cost of getting to port Yeah.
Prohibitive. So have you got any examples of
any farms or trusts
or companies you're working with north of Tomo Bay
to alleviate that?
And many people will appreciate your use
of the word incentives, um,
particularly when we are talking about land use.
Um, what incentives have you got in place, um,
and have you got any examples of any
of those being delivered?
Yeah, so, so Sophie, just to come to your first, uh,
question, um, about when it costs a lot to get product
to market and get it overseas
and so on, uh, we, we have to think more deeply about, uh,
where investment is put and the infras infrastructure may be
and how you would get it to a market.
There are examples in that part of the country though where,
um, where, um, uh, saw mills
and others are looking to use wood
and maybe add value, process it more closely.
Uh, there's a great example, uh, an air gson of a saw mill
that closed, that was bought by
Australians that up and running.
They're actually, um, talking to government not about, uh,
funding incentive,
but the regulatory settings
where they can do some code generation there
for their own plant and to share in the grid more widely
that they say that they're using it in Australia elsewhere
and can work very well in New Zealand.
And they will take any fiber that they can get.
I think what you're gonna see over the next sort of five
to 10 years is much more interest in the value of the fiber
and the trees that we've been growing than necessarily the
log and the use for it.
Now that doesn't help, that doesn't help, you know,
the forests you're talking about right now,
but it is something that's very, very interesting.
So if you come back to what I sort
of said about the wider primary sector
and how innovative we are
and food production, that's pretty easy
to see and pretty obvious.
But radiata prime,
and we shouldn't call it radiata pine,
we should call it New Zealand Pine
because radiata in New Zealand grows faster
and better than anywhere else in the world.
It is a great resource
and the, the world is looking for fiber
and they want it sustainably, uh, uh, provided and growing
and they'll take it or they'll take the value
that's added to it as well.
So I think in a couple of areas through the, um, the, the,
um, primary sector growth fund, uh, which, uh, um, you know,
was we have changed and refocus.
We have put a bit more money and I moved it around.
We've been very clear that forestry, it was,
it's always been part of it is a very central part now
partner with the private sector
and others about how they can innovate
and grow in partnership.
Government has some money. Uh, we are not the lion's share
of it and that greater use
and other types of use of
wood is something we're interested in.
The second thing is, if you think
about wood processing, right?
I think it changes in the many years here.
I don't think it happens today, but the use of wood, uh, and
and, and what we might want to use it for does change.
So largely, uh, you know, it's the log that's expensive
to get the port and get overseas.
If value is added to it, even just put it through a sawmill
and treat it, the value goes up.
But the ability to do that for a range of reasons, including
for a extended period of time, cost of energy makes, makes
that makes that hard, right?
But as we get better market access around the world,
tariff rates come down, it's easier to get, uh,
wood has had value added to it into those markets,
which means it's not about can you give us a money
or have a better road to get to that port.
It's how can we add value right here?
So what we get is a lot more, and it's as simple as that.
And it's something that Steve and I have talked about quite
often in this committee, right?
Should we be adding value to milk products
and sending them out and selling them for more,
or just producing a lot more
of them turning into milk powder and just sending that over.
And so the answer is, you know, know it's a little bit
of both, but the point here is how do we, uh,
start adding value through innovation
and science to, um, the fiber that's in the wood,
rather than thinking about it as something
that's gonna go overseas and be turned into packaging
or pulp or something else and export it back.
Um, your particular question, uh, the, the, the, my, my, um,
officials about to dive into a lot more detail of some
of the particular, uh, uh, you know,
farms and trusts and so on.
I don't get involved in that
level, but they are doing a lot.
Okay. So just in terms of the initiatives then,
because to add value to just get to a mill,
it's the same distance as the port,
you know, the nearest mill.
So are there any concrete projects
or initiatives underway in that part of the country
to add value closer to home?
Um, well, well the answer is that yes, through, uh,
looking at whether, um, the fiber, so, so, so more broadly
and then the officials will come to the detail.
I don't wanna get it wrong, but,
but you know, um, there are people now who are saying,
we can plant trees and grow them for six years
and make more money if we grow them for 20.
'cause actually it can go into bioenergy.
We need somebody there to do that.
And they're working through that. The technology
is available around the world.
It's never been landed properly in New Zealand.
And largely there are many companies
or individuals want us to help,
but it's socializing the risk as opposed to showing
that it is viable yet.
But we are putting a lot of thought to that
and we get lots of requests
and there is, there is money, there is money available
versus secondly, um, um, it's not just a matter of going
to an existing mill because in your part of the country,
there was a mill that closed down.
Mm-hmm. And government didn't put money into it,
and it's reopened and it is making money.
Remarkably, they have the same
energy challenge as others do.
They're doing co-generation and they're making it work.
And, and so they themselves are now saying, we need,
we need more fiber.
They are going out and looking at where it is
and how they can get it to them without the
government having to chuck money in.
Mm-hmm. That's how the, you know, that's
how the private sector should work.
However, there are other parts of the country where
that is likely less likely to happen.
And we don't have an obligation, but we have a desire
and a will to look at how we can help a lot.
We can do the very good news in the meantime,
as the trees are not disappearing, going outta value,
then it's starting to get a little bit bigger.
Uh, but we're, we're keen to work with different groups, iwi
or others, about how we can free up the value of the land.
The final thing, as you mentioned
around land use change in that area, right?
There is a very, very tough decision coming
for council about the, the need for land use change
for sustainability.
And after the significant weather events,
we're working very constructively with them
as they are largely with the sector from iwi
to forest owners to, um, to farmers
and so on, that they have a single message for that council
who actually over the last sort of year
and a half have really stepped up to understand
the significance of some
of the decisions they might make on a local economy
for getting that balance right.
Is to keep working with, you know,
the experts across those three groups to get it right
because, uh, and through we don't have the luxury
of making the wrong decisions.
People livelihoods are at stake here, uh,
growing trees in that area has a future.
Will it be the same as it has been in the past?
Obviously it can't be.
Is there an opportunity for agriculture
and more, you know, valuable agriculture?
Absolutely. That there is, but it's only
by getting the stakeholders from those three groups,
from iwi, from forestry
and the farming community get with the council
that we will get the decisions.
Right. The government has a, a role to play,
but that role is
to make the right decisions, not just to write checks.
Mr. Chair? Yes,
I have a supplementary on the back of that, um,
my minister, if I can, uh, and thank you Mr.
Chair. Um, on the back of the slash issue in t RAF
and the Gisborne area, uh,
and the learnings there are, uh, that we as a,
as a government
and, you know, previous government have taken from it.
Where are we in terms of the cleanup?
Um, and that's ongoing and I appreciate
and has there been a change in the methodology to do
with slash traps back burning slash dams, et cetera,
uh, given the kind of of topographical makeup of RAF
and, and what does future learning look like?
Yeah, uh, so we set up the Rafe, uh,
forestry Action Group, um, um, a year and a half ago.
And it's council iwi, um, forestry forest, um,
contractors and, and also, uh, farming groups there.
And, and I sort of said to them, the previous government,
we have given you a lot of money to clean up
and I'm concerned that we won't get as much, uh, wood uh,
cleaned up as we need to,
and you'll be, uh, back asking for money
and I'll have to take it somewhere else.
So we got 'em to get the work very, very constructively.
The amount of wood that's been taken off, uh, you know,
the beaches and, and the hillside
and everything else was significant.
Second thing I've asked 'em
to do is start considering a legacy issue.
So with a few exceptions, most of the wood that comes down
to weather events is there
because it was allowed to be based on conditions, rules,
consents previously.
And I don't wanna give the impression that
that group can take that risk, you know,
that will stop that.
But ultimately there is a legacy issue.
So how can we mitigate that, reduce the risk,
start getting it off?
What are better practices?
And I'm very, very grateful all those that,
that have committed to that group and the council
because they have done a better job than, than was happening
in cleaning up, uh, woody biomass.
And then secondly, come up with ways to work together on
what it all should be and solutions for the future.
The government's approach is
around risk in areas of low or no risk.
Uh, uh, you can have fewer rules as the risk goes up.
You need greater rules. And sometimes what we've, you know,
we've done not with government, we collectively
as a society is a one size fits all,
which puts cost in areas where it shouldn't be
and the rules probably aren't stringent enough
and others, other places where there is greater risk.
So they're working through, uh, all, all of all of that.
Uh, um, so, so ultimately the answer to your question is
that, um, the amount of wood's been cleaned up is better.
Uh, the council is being very, very smart
that you answered about uh, slash uh, traps and riverways.
And when I first visited, they weren't able to consent those
'cause they hadn't been done before.
And they were a bit concerned about this.
It makes sense that in a weather event you catch the slash
if it has to be in a waterway in one place
and take it out rather all the way down a river ruining
infrastructure and so on.
Uh, down around the Hawkes Bay, uh, uh, down, um,
around Napier, they had consented a small one.
It gives me, council I understand,
was able to learn from that.
And as it started to look at consents
and so on, uh, these are practices that are used
around the world to great effect.
Uh, we, we, you know, we need to find ways
with the foresters to bring them here.
If I may just go back very, very briefly,
you also asked about some of the, the,
we have the wood processing growth fund
that is available as well.
It is not as well subscribed as I would like it to be.
And so I have asked for us to sharpen it a bit
and find ways that it really can help.
I, I want that to do as much as it can,
but it does sit there and it is available.
Uh, and um, I said to officials, we,
if we have the money available should working for people to,
with people to spend it,
but we want it to go as far as it can to achieve a lot.
Thank you. Uh, Steve, change the subject.
Yeah, yeah.
Um, minister, um, the nitrate
and the Coli problem in Canterbury, uh,
when Environment Canterbury declared a nitrate emergency,
you described it as gimmicky, I think was the word you used.
Um, I wonder, can you clarify for Ians, whether you
do take seriously the health risks from nitrate and e coli
and, uh, how concerned are you about those rising nitrate
and e coli levels?
Well, well I think I've been very clear for contagion,
so I don't need to, uh,
clarify anything in front of this committee.
At the time. I said it fails,
others said it feels a bit gimmicky.
Uh, you know, the day before, uh, the council was to stop,
to go to election, to jump up and down
and declare a crisis or an emergency.
We take responsibilities of there very, very seriously.
Everybody cities to towns to rural New Zealand, uh,
have obligations around fresh water and what happens,
and I know farmers are, you know, as willing to do there,
but as perhaps people and towns and cities are as well.
But ultimately, uh, we have a number of rules
that are put in place by the previous government
that we're creating significant cost and burden.
If councils around the country are saying the fresh water
laws that have been posed upon us
and are not working, we can't meet the
requirements, which is crazy.
We can't get water for some of our small towns.
And so as a government, you've seen us commit to, uh, work
through these and replace them.
That work is now underway.
I have input as a minister of agriculture,
but I'm not one of the, uh, ministers
who I don't have direct ministerial responsibility.
That's others, uh, that do that are MA ministers
and environment ministers.
But ensuring that not only the concerns around the rules
that aren't working, thus adding costs, uh,
that come from the primary sector are heard
by those ministers, but equally
that the farming community knows
that they have responsibilities and they must meet them
Supplementary. Yep.
So what responsibility do you, as agman is
to take for the undeniable impact
of intensification in terms of
that increase in nitrate levels
and it's continues to increase
and the fact that your government is touted, its with pride,
its removal of a lot, a lot
of the fresh water protections this term.
So we haven't, How are you, uh, taking account
for the impact that agriculture,
particularly intensive dairying is having in Canterbury
and what are you gonna do to fix the
Problems? Steve? That's a misleading
statement.
We haven't gone out and said
that we have undone protections.
We've said they haven't worked
and it's been evident across the board
and we're working very, very hard to fix it.
Farmers as with you in the town that you live in,
someone in the city have obligations to,
to the environment improve, uh, towns
and cities have just as much obligations, everybody else.
But what we don't hear from your party often
is actually harm that is done in other areas.
Uh, you seem to want to focus on rural community in farmers.
Uh, actually, if a rule isn't working and it is costly
and the cost is greater than the outcome you derive
from it, that's red tape.
And we have gone out and changed that,
but we are not undoing environmental protection.
We are looking for smarter roles that achieve what we need
to, rather than just saying they're the bad guys,
let's call our crisis and jump up and down in the media.
'cause that's what happened on that day.
But I guess the problem is the problem is getting worse
and I'm really asking,
And I'm sorry it was getting worse when your party was in
government even though you weren't there.
So your colleagues voted for the rules that don't work.
So we have said we are going to be responsible.
We are looking at the RMA, we are placing the NPS, uh,
for freshwater management.
We're working very closely with the councils,
but I'm sorry, what you put in place previously was costing
money and wasn't achieving what it needed to.
That's the worst type of decision making
and was lucky you weren't there.
'cause if you were, I'd ask you to go to category
and explain to them why that happened.
But are you telling pregnant people
who are concerned about the risk
of a 47% increase in preterm birth
by drinking high nitro water,
that they should not be worried about the gimmick?
No, I'm telling, and I'm telling people
that you are being overly political not with the choice
of your words and that
what your government put in place wasn't working
and working hard to fix it.
It was getting worse when you got there.
And actually what we're doing is saying that didn't work
and we need a much smarter approach.
That's Mr. Chair line.
Sorry to press on this, but the minister keeps putting
the blame on the last government.
I wonder, can you take responsibility
the lower nitrate levels through
Your strategies? So, so, so,
so lemme tell you,
it's really, really straightforward.
We put a pause to anything else coming in where we got.
Yeah. But the rules that you put in place haven't actually
largely been taken away.
I'll come back happily in three
or four years time, uh, uh, when, uh, the changes that we,
uh, proposing have bettered in
and we'll have the debate then.
But I, uh, uh, don't take responsibility for the mistakes
that the labor green government mate.
Well, that draws it to, uh, time.
So, um, thank you Minister and officials.
Thank you. Well done.
Thank you Minister for your company and your wisdom.
You know that.
So Carla, are we gonna stay in public session
or are we just gonna close this
one and go into the next one? We'll stay in public.
We'll stay in public. It's all, um, same item, mark.
Yeah. Yeah. All right. Very good.